---
title: "Gren 25S: Easier interop, concurrent tasks and zero-install packages"
published: "2025-07-21"
---

A new version of the Gren programming language is now available! There are no syntax changes in this release, but there are still major features to talk about. Task ports simplifies interop with JavaScript. Tasks now run concurrently. Packages can now easily be commited to version control, and the compiler now let you run helper programs defined in packages.

## What do we mean by 25S?

Twice a year we release backward incompatible changes of the compiler and the core packages, all of which have their own version number.

25S, or the 2025 Summer release, consist of the following software:

* compiler v0.6.0
* gren-lang/core v7.0.0
* gren-lang/browser v6.0.0
* gren-lang/node v6.0.0

## Task ports

Ports is the mechanism we use to send values between JavaScript and Gren _without_ sacrificing
Gren's guarantee of immutability and managed side effects.

One limitation of ports is that you can only define `Cmd` (sending a message from Gren to JavaScript) and `Sub` (JavaScript to Gren) ports.
If you wanted to send a value to JavaScript and immedietly get a response, you'd have to model that with two ports
and have some way of knowing that one value received from a `Sub` is bound to the request you sent through as a `Cmd`.

We've now made this pattern a bit easier, by allowing you to define `Task` ports.

Defining the port itself is simple enough:

```elm
port myTaskPort : String -> Task Json.Value Int
```

In JavaScript you can define the task port implementation like so:

```js
const { Gren } = require('./app.js');

Gren.Main.init({
  taskPorts: {
    myTaskPort: async function(str) {
      return str.length;
    }
  }
})
```

Task ports must be implemented as async functions, or functions returning promises on the JS side. If anything goes wrong,
like an exception being thrown, it will be represented as a failed task in Gren, with the exception represented as a JSON
value.

## Concurrent tasks

`Task` is what we use to perform managed side effects, like performing a HTTP call.

If you wanted to perform multiple tasks, you were limited to either perform these sequentially (one after another) _or_
turn them into commands that could be run concurrently using `Cmd.batch`. This later option required you to deal with the responses
using The Elm Architecture, which can be a lot of work in certain cases.

With this release, tasks defined using `Task.map2`, `Task.map3` or `Task.andMap` will run concurrently. There's also a `Task.concurrent` function
for executing a whole array of tasks concurrently.

Do note that concurrency _is not_ paralellism. Concurrency allows you to wait for multiple things at the same time, while paralellism allows
you to _do_ multiple things at the same time. Using `Task.map2` with two HTTP requests will now be faster, but using `Task.map2` to compute
two seperate things will have the same performance as before.

This feature was contributed by Andrew MacMurray.

## Zero-install package management

When compiling projects, the compiler will now store dependencies as gzipped files in a `gren_packages` folder at the root of your project.
We recommend that you commit this folder to version control, as it will allow your project to compile even if you don't have network access.
It will also mean that you don't have to download dependencies unless you're adding them to your project for the first time.

This feature was part of a rewrite of the package manager. It is now written in Gren itself, and some of the underlying functionality
is available in the [compiler-node](https://github.com/gren-lang/compiler-node) package.

## Gren run

As a convenience, there is now a command to compile _and_ execute an application:

```
gren run Main
```

That might not sound like much, but if you add a `--package` flag, you'll be able to execute
helper applications defined in packages, almost like using `npx` in the node.js ecosystem.

In theory, this would allow you to setup a test suite for your project (not implemented):

```
gren run --package=gren-lang/test-runner-node Setup
```

It also gives you a simple way to run your test suite:

```
gren run Tests
```

## Misc. changes

`gren path` is a new command that prints paths that are important during compilation. The path to the current
project, the backend binary being used and the cache folder.

While adding support for concurrent tasks, we also found a way to optimize the execution of tasks
and commands. You can expect better performance when running a large number of tasks and commands.

You can now also unwrap `Cmd` from a `Task x (Cmd a)` type using `Task.executeCmd`. This makes it possible
to end a `Task` chain with a `Cmd`, giving you a limited way to combine such side effects.

Mapping functions over more than three values (`map4`, `map5`, etc.) have been removed from most modules,
with an exception made for the JSON modules. If you ever want to map more than three values at a time, we've
added `andMap` to enable that.

There's a new module in the specific case when logging to a `Stream`, called `Stream.Log`. This module
ignores any error that occurs in the process of sending a value to the `Stream`. In general, we recommend
that you only use this module for logging to the `stdout` or `stderr` streams, and use the regular `Stream`
module for most other cases where errors are more likely to occur.

Joey Bright has made several improvements to the `Crypto` API in response to user feedback. There are no
new features, but the types are more correct.

You can now listen for `SIGINT` and `SIGTERM` signals in applications targetting the `node` platform. You can
also listen for the event where the JS event loop runs out of work.

Filesystem errors now carries the relevant `Path`, which tends to be useful for error reporting or debugging.

## Thank you, contributors!

This release was made through contributions from the following people:

* [Andrew MacMurray](https://github.com/andrewMacmurray)
* [Jeroen Engels](https://github.com/jfmengels)
* [Joey Bright](https://github.com/joeybright)
* [Justin Blake](https://github.com/blaix)
* [Martin S Stewart](https://github.com/MartinSStewart)
* [Michael Paul Killian](https://github.com/michi-zuri)
* [Robin Heggelund Hansen](https://github.com/robinheghan)

## Support the project

You can support Gren financially by [sponsering us at ko-fi](https://ko-fi.com/gren) or by [buying merch from the shop](https://www.etsy.com/shop/GrenProgramming?ref=gren-lang-dot-org).
The profits allow members of the core team to take a day off from their day job and spend it developing
Gren instead.

Being an open-source project, there are also other ways to contribute. Spread the word. Report bugs.
Contribute new features. In any case, you likely want to join our [Discord](https://discord.gg/Chb9YB9Vmh) first.
